alhamdulillah I hope the trajectory I've
been attempting over the past two or 3
days has not been too erratic or
impossible even to discern what I've
tried to do is first of
all
to describe the
terrain in which a muid and an educator
such as IM Al
gazali must
operate the scriptural and psychological
and social parameters for any Islamic
project of Reform and education or as I
try to suggest re-education Islamic
education is all fundamentally about
re-education reorientation rather than
simple orienting of
ourselves then I spoke about the of IM
gazali explaining the well now
miraculous quality of his life and his
prolific
achievements the fact that he hardly
wrote a book that did not detonate like
a bomb in the intellectual and social
world of medieval
Islam that Islam was never the same
again and that the
great to this
day insist on the reading of
the on condition that one approaches it
with
humility whenever he was approached by a
student who wanted
permission to read the of
imali said yes on condition that you
have sufficient or
humility
because that was the quality of the Imam
himself
and the Soul speaks to the
soul and
arrogance
snobbishness
self-reliance self-regard all of these
are qualities that will Veil us from any
of the depths and the
secrets with which the Imam has stuffed
every page of his
text the is not primarily about the
inculcation of information about Dean it
is about personal transformation
the imam's own s radiates from its
Pages the
Alchemy which Allah wrot in his heart is
available for our hearts as well on
condition that we have that humility and
that M that self scrutiny and self
accounting that was one of the imam's
most prominent
virtues what I'm going to do in the time
between now and the
for is for the sake
of acquiring Baraka from the im's
greatest work
the to read a few pages from
it to drop from the
ocean some of you may already have
acquired the
translation of the
of
the this
is a book of the that immediately
follows his General explanation of what
spiritual war is all about the
stratagems of that
war that the warrior must adopt and the
stratagems likely to be adopted by the
enemy
and after doing that and explaining the
nature of the the nafs the ego the
self and the stages through which it
must
pass and the acquisition of beautiful
qualities and the suppression of evil
qualities of sloth anger
self-esteem and the rest
the Imam then moves on to deal with the
two most conspicuous passions in the
human
creature which
are gluttony and
lust and after this book The the
breaking of the two desires he then goes
on to deal with some of the more subtle
inde
definable perhaps more resistant human
passions passion for
reputation the passion for
self-esteem anger sense of
superiority
jealousy all the familiar
vices which lurk in the recesses of the
heart accumulations of dirt that it is
sometimes extraordinarily difficult even
to see let alone to squeeze
out one reason why we need a guide
teure is essential in all of the of
Islam but in none more so than in this
science of healing the
heart
because the a of individuals
differ the is applicable equally to all
Muslims unless they have some
or
but the heart differs drastically much
more than does the
body because the heart is subject to
innate
capacities and
debilities and has also been socially
conditioned by good or bad parenting
good or bad
schooling fous circumstances of the
civilization into which one happens to
be
born and a myriad of other influences
that have made us the characters that we
are
so there is no one medicine and no one
prescription for these illnesses of the
heart that's why we need a doctor we
need to go and see one in
person explain the symptoms and like any
good doctor he will read between the
lines of what we say take our pulse look
at us
carefully draw on his immense
experience and then prescribe a
remedy not anybody can do
that and of those who can do it not
everybody is as
good some will openly say that they can
treat certain souls and not others one
of the
Communist sites in Islamic wayfaring is
for the mid to return dejected from a
meeting with a
saint in whom he had had High Hopes but
the saint says I can't deal with your
situation with your problems the saint
will inevitably attribute the
shortcoming to himself rather than to
the soul of the patient but the reality
is that there are as many different
types of souls as there are human beings
because it is the Divine will that he
should have created
Humanity in an indefinite variety of
types and
forms so we need a teacher Aid a
of the type that IM outlined so
exquisitly in the that we had the
privilege to read this
morning and without a
guide those pockets of dirt in the
recesses and Fs of the
heart will simply
Fester become worse is because it is the
nature of a vice that is never
static a vice if left
untended will accumulate and
grow if we allow the Naps a certain
weakness on a routine
basis then that routine will become a
compulsion and when we finally try to
suppress it because we are humiliated by
its public consequences we find that
it's too late and we simply can't do it
and we are possessed by that Vice
so we need a
teacher
or who can look into our souls and
compassionately diagnose a
solution that solution can take any of
an indefinite variety of forms depending
on the tradition with which the shh is
working can take the form of certain
called from theab and theah and the
words of the the
purified repeated a certain number of
times it can take the form of directions
concerning one's worldly life career
choices
even the subjects one studies can take
the form of advice
concerning the company one
keeps type of advice that the true shh
the can
offer is uh infinite infinite in its
variety hence the need to take this
advice from a person and not from a book
because a book can never be infinite and
a book can never see the
reader so this is Imam al- gazali's
ambitious intention in this book to try
and capture in words and on
paper something of this inherently oral
human transformative
science and in this book that we'll be
broaching this afternoon
he looks at the two
easiest but in many cases strongest
human
weaknesses strongest because they are
instinctual and programmed into the
human
body and they are not vices in the sense
that for
instance jealousy or hatred or
self-esteem ofces those are things that
are to be extrated
entirely but the desire for
food the desire for sexual relations are
not in themselves
vices this is a case in which what is
required is the golden mean an
equilibrium where the Naps is
still not because the property itself
has been
eliminated but because its Cravings have
been stilled because it is
receiving uh its minimum requirement
that's why kazali has put them together
in this kab he could have had separate
books in the about them but they are so
similar in terms of their properties
that he has put them together and as
we'll see they are closely
related
causally so at the beginning of the book
and I don't know if any of you have
copies with you in case you do this is
on page 106 of the
translation I will skip the de Badger
the
the ham and the and begin where he
says and he begins with
something quite extraordinary but he
says it without
qualification and it needs to be
pondered carefully because he
says the greatest of the Mortal vices
which a man May Harbor is the desire of
the
stomach incidentally in this kind of
text
uh the uh
pronouns should be taken as being gender
inclusive this applies equally to
females as well as to males although the
historical reality is that Imam Al
kaz's readership was overwhelmingly
male but all of the virtues and vices
which he discusses appear uh in either
sex so he says this extraordinary thing
the greatest of the Mortal vices in
other words mortal in the sense they
lead to Eternal death deprivation of
God's presence salvation is the desire
of the
stomach greed here he puts at the head
of his list of
vices why should this
be then he goes
on because of it were Adam and Eve
Alim expelled from the Abode of
permanence into the Abode of humiliation
and
poverty for although they had been
forbidden the tree their desire overcame
them so that they at from
it and their private parts did become
apparent unto
them now for those of us who have been
shaped wittingly or otherwise by what
remains of the assumptions of Western
Christian civilization this needs to be
thought about
carefully because
as I tried to suggest in the first talk
in this
series we have a very different
assumption about the fall we don't even
call it the
fall the departure perhaps Exile
possibly but not fall then the
assumptions prevalent in the usual
particularly Western Christian
Matrix
because the departure from
Eden as we saw actually leads to a
higher state in the case of Adam which
is
Thea
but the traditional assumption in the
west is that that expulsion is
associated
with human
sexuality and that sexuality is a
consequence of the fall and that to
overcome the consequences the sinfulness
original sin
generated by the Fall by the sin of Adam
and particularly
Eve sexuality needs to be reigned in or
preferably extrated
altogether now this goes back to
Augustine and it is still normative in
Roman Catholic theology the Orthodox
have a somewhat different Theory rather
more muted rather closer to ours since
we're living in a Christian or postr
civilization we really need to be aware
of
this what they say is that celibacy is
aepic anticipation of the state of the
Blessed in the
Kingdom what they mean by aepic
anticipation is that it is a lived
anticipation in other words because the
state of the Blessed in
Paradise after Redemption by
Christ is a celibate State therefore the
blessed in this world are required to
anticipate that state state by a
celibate
lifestyle hence the Roman Catholic
clergy are required to be
celbrate it's not just as they
themselves will sometimes seek to claim
nowadays because that would leave them
with more time to attend to their
parishes that's not the traditional
argument at all the argument is rooted
in their understanding of The Human
Condition and is one of the fundamental
presuppositions of their theology
one reason why it's so very difficult
for them to abolish
it
so sexuality is a consequence of the
Fall why because man is now mortal
therefore he needs to reproduce himself
therefore that aspect of Human
Experience
is something that is inevitably sinful
and connected with a fallen transient
uh nature and distance from God now what
im Ali is saying
here he doesn't make the comparison
explicit because for his world it wasn't
terribly
important is that it's is that human
sexuality really has nothing to do with
the
fall the fall is occasioned on IM
gazali's understanding by desire for the
forbidden fruit in other words by a kind
of gluttoning desire for food
it's that one of the two passions not
the other that is to
blame and when we inshallah if we have
an opportunity talk about IM gazali's
understanding of the second of these two
passions and
sexuality um we'll go into that in more
detail because this is the area in
which Islam has the strongest argument
against certainly the Roman Catholic
church and to a considerable extent
those Protestant
churches that have remained Catholic in
this particular area of their theology
more of that later
inshallah he goes on to
say after the belly which is the very
Wellspring of desires and the source of
diseases and
disorders he'll uh talk about this more
later it was uh under stood in classical
Islam that most sicknesses and human
indispositions come about through a bad
diet or through an excessive
diet a point that is uncontroversial
amongst modern Physicians so many
illnesses fundamental breakdowns in the
human form come about through
obesity so he says after this comes the
desire of the sex and then yearning
after Fame and wealth
which are no more than means which
enable one to indulge one's greed and
desire in still greater measure in other
words these other vices the desire to be
famous to be admired to be popular to
have money these are all me means to an
end which is gratifying these two basic
animal Cravings in the human
creature and after the acquisition of
Fame and wealth come the several kinds
of frivolities competitions and
jealousies they also give rise to the
vices of ostentation boasting
competition for wealth and arrogance
which in turn lead to ranker Envy enmity
and hate which go on to cause iniquity
Injustice and corruption in our age as
in the
imams so he says all of these things are
the consequences of paying insufficient
heed to the stomach and of the Arrogant
exalting which is begotten of satiety in
eating one's
F where the bondsman the ab only to
Humble his nafs
through
hunger and thereby narrow the courses
which the devil pursues within him it
would give itself up to The Obedience of
Allah subhanahu wa tala and would
renounce the way of it exaltation and
excess so that he would be preserved
from being dragged by these things into
a preoccupation with the world and into
preferring this present Abode to that
which is to come and would never be so
AVID for worldly
things again a large
statement he's offering this apparent
apparently simple
prescription for all of the derivative
vices and this might seem hyperbolic or
an exaggeration but when you think about
it
Ramadan uh has only just
passed this state that he calls
exaltation but in Arabic the kind of
exuberant swaggering is not possible
when you're
fasting you can't Swagger when you've
been fasting all day fasting because it
induces hunger and also a sense of
Detachment from the
world makes you more humble more austere
more serious more disappointed with the
dun you cannot Swagger when you're
fasting and if you do then it's
unnatural and we all
know that if we fast properly these
other vices if we come to think about
them become less common because they are
to do with the ego being puffed
up pride ostentation self-regard myself
the me as the center of the
universe that's much harder when you're
fasting so when the shtin had chained
because the domain of the shtin is the
Naps so even if if you're not
fasting if you are to some extent
hungry then the shatina gain a chained
and this kind of confidence swaggering
through the world which is the way of
modern man Modern
Man becomes
harder so he begins with this kind of
rolling
broadside uh to indicate the enormous
significance of this apparently basic
religious virtue that he's going to
describe now for those of you who are
not familiar with the imam's
educational method in
the it may be helpful to indicate that
the which is divided into
40 or
books of quite radically differing
length depending on the
subject are internally divided in
different ways sometimes they're divided
into two halves sometimes they're
divided into what he calls expositions
or bayonet
sometimes there are other smaller
subdivisions but usually at the
beginning he gives you a strong
rhetorical like declamation of the
importance of this subject in order to
grab you by the the beard and make you
look hard at the subject that
is uh addressing and then he goes into
the details and going into the details
invariably he follows the method of
first of all citing quranic
verses and then hadiths
and then sayings of the early Muslims
the and then he gives his own Exposition
and explanation that's his
usual pattern and this is the usual
hierarchy of knowledge not just in this
discipline but in other Islamic
disciplines as well wherever ad are
being
cited the words of Allah and his
messenger come
first so he gets into this series of
bayans in this kab
sh and perhaps at this point I should
open another parenthesis and indicate
that in keeping with the universal
practice of the of
Islam he uses Hadith to make his points
that do not always conform to the most
rigorous standards of the and the people
of
and to a superficial mind this may seem
strange given that he was the Great
Master
of he knew exactly
the the way in which the should or
should not be
used but in this book he frequently uses
a
Hadith which either were once regarded
as but whose isad or whose context were
lost per perhaps following the sack of
bdad and Central Asia by the Mongols
shortly after his death this is the view
of Islam
zakar or
alternatively because the agree that it
is legitimate to use a weak Hadith in
the inculcation of
Virtues
says it is permissible to use a weak
Hadith as a proof text
when inculcating virtuous Deeds this is
the view of Salah as well
and and it's the normal position of
normative Sunni
Islam you can't use a weak Hadith in
order to establish a point of Doctrine
or a point of law unless you have a
large number of those weak hadiths and
certain other in whose details um can be
discussed in the context
of but in terms of the inculcation of
the virtues as long as a weak Hadith
does not contradict any known principle
from a stronger Source it is permissible
and useful to use this material and this
is the principal reason why the sought
to preserve these Hadith in the first
place
so in this section we find that he
offers some Hadith to back up his view
that hunger is a
virtue
gluttony is the root of all other sins
and vices so he
says in AI
the says a descendant of Adam this is
Page 109 can fill no container worse
than his own
belly a few small mouthfuls should
suffice to keep his back straight
if he cannot keep to this then let him
fill one third with his food one third
with his drink and keep the other for
his
breath it's a wellknown Hadith narrated
by IB Ma and
others and then he goes on to cite a
much longer Hadith from IM IB
hanbal which
is one of the most extraordinarily
beautiful Hadith that I've ever read and
ties in
with what im says in
his about the hidden
Saints this Hadith says the nearest of
all men to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala on
the day of judgment shall be those who
are often hungry thirsty and grief
stricken in this world who were
affectionate and
God-fearing who when seen went
unrecognized
and who when absent were never missed by
men but yet were known to the provinces
of the earth and were compassed by the
angels of
heaven others rejoiced in the world but
they rejoiced in their obedience to
Allah subhanahu wa
taala others made soft beds for
themselves while they rested only on
their foreheads and their
knees others caused the works and the
morals of the prophets to be lost while
they observed
them the Earth itself weeps when it
loses them and the almighty's Wrath
descends upon every land in which they
are not
found because they are a
protection
for the land the people amongst whom
they
live says in one of his great about the
The House of the Mustafa the chosen one
those who are purified they are a
protection a man for the people of the
earth know this
well they are compared to the shining
stars as has been handed down in the
sunah Allah
says Allah would never punish them while
you are amongst
them and he will never punish them while
they seek
forgiveness this refers to the Al
wasam that the Sinners the unbelievers
in the city of Mecca were protected from
the Divine
punishment despite the unique historic
crime of looking into the
face of Al
must and not recognizing who he was and
what he was but they were protected
because he was amongst them
and thus it is with
the and the and the who are his
HS they also whether or not they are
honored or even known a protection for
the lands the peoples amongst whom they
live and the Hadith goes
on then the Imam
sites it is is said that it is written
in the Torah
that Allah hates a corpulent Divine Hab
has the sense of a a rabbi or a learned
person in an earlier
Community this is cited in the
of this is because
corpulence obesity fatness is a sign of
heedlessness and an AB abundant
Indulgence in food
something which is especially ugly in
the case of a a Hab a learned man
religious
leader this is it must be said sometimes
a weakness amongst
our in some countries the tend to be not
the most auster but some of the plumpest
people in the subcontinent this seems to
be the
case masallah the of the jamat sitting
around each morsel of rice seems to be
the size of a tennis
ball and then they go again and
again and then they give their bayans
about
D this Hadith is warning
us about that in some Arab countries as
well in
Egypt I used to know an Alim very
beautiful person but in Ramadan
after he would eat what they
call those who've been to Egypt will
know what that means an entire big round
aluminium tray of a thick sort of
glutenous
Suite this is
again extremely
worrying so it's for this reason
that said
Allah hates a reader of the Quran who
has become fat through frequently eating
his
fil and he said sallallah alai
wasam the believer eats with one
gut while
the the the hypocrite eats with seven
guts
and then Hadith from Abu Hur never did
the rasol s. wasam eat his fill of wheat
bread for three consecutive days until
he left till he left this world the most
basic nowadays an accessory to food
something that's chucked on the table in
Great mountains and most of it is wasted
that we just nibble at without even
paying any attention to it but never
once in his life was the
sallam sated even with that most basic
commodity light years separate us from
from his
practice then he cites uh a traditional
wisdom a hikma
from lman once said to his
son oh my son when the belly is full
then the intellect sleeps wisdom is
silenced and the members of the body are
too slothful to perform any act of
worship you're stuffed you can't eat
anything more all you want to do is sit
back and burp maybe watch the television
read something light but really you
don't want to do too many rakas or read
too much
Quran this is
a universal
experience one reason of course for the
institution of
T is to make us think about exactly how
much we're guzzling
after if we don't we pay the price an
hour or so of acute discomfort after
AA and then he cites a number of sayings
from many of the Sala and it was
particularly a virtue associated with
the salaf that they would cultivate this
virtue of
hunger there was a generation amongst
the Sala known as
theak those who wept
constantly weeping because of their
fear fear that now that the rasol and
the sahaba were gone their memories were
no more than
Shadows that worldliness would overtake
the umah as it was doing with the of
bani with so many of the wealthy amongst
the um and they
wept for fear for the um and fear for
their own
selves fear of the inevitability of
death the grave
corruption the defacement of our
features in the
grave Terrors of the
resurrection and the greater Terrors of
the
punishment so they had this and they
wept and one of the great ones amongst
these people was Abu
darani one of the great B
and IM Al gazali cites a number of
sayings from IM
abuan and he also cites a whole list of
sayings from a man who is perhaps more
associated with this virtue of of hunger
than anyone else amongst the early
Muslims and this is Al
im
abdah an important Saint one of the
great luminaries in our history
from Southwestern
Iran died in the year
283 and he was a
pupil in Z renunciation of the world
this great Hadith
virtue and also of
Hadith of Imam sufyan
thi and he also
inaugurated one of the school that
eventually was to flow into Tas as we
know it
today through his leading pupil Muhammad
bin
Salim Muhammad bin Salim gave his name
to a school known as the Salia which was
a theological and also aesthetical
school which had its Center in an
island in the Euphrates River known as
Aban which was a place where people went
to
study and Hadith and also to discipline
their souls and to learn these virtues
of renunciation and of
hunger Muhammad bin Salim and S the two
great pioneers of of of the retreat and
Aban and sah was particularly known for
having achieved purity of Soul through
hunger this was his particular
method so the Imam says here s used to
go for 20 odd days together without
eating one Durham would suffice him him
for the whole
year and regarding the Hadith of oneir
for one's food in other words you leave
one third of what your stomach for your
food one third for drink and one third
for your breath this is in the sound
Hadith where theas himself commends this
virtue
frugality sah said whoever exceeds
this what he is eating is in fact his
own good works
and he said the abdal this is a category
of Saint referred to in
Hadith that abdal attained their rank
only by making their bellies slender and
through
sleeplessness silence and
Solitude the auster way of the athetic
the
CA and he said the beginning of every
virtue sent down from Heaven to Earth is
hunger and the beginning of every Vice
which exist between the twain is eating
one's
F the second chapter or the second Bay
in
the IM gives it the title an exposition
of the benefits of hunger and the evils
of
satiety and here he
talks he he does not so much list the
hadiths and thear which is done in the
previous chapter as to present his own
analysis of what all this could
mean so he says now you may ask this
great Merit which attaches to hunger for
what thing does it proceed and what
reason is there for
it for Hunger comprises nothing more
than hurting the stomach and enduring
torment and if there be reward in such
things then man should be rewarded
generously for every hurt which he
sustained STS including blows which he
inflicts upon himself cutting his own
flesh swallowing loathsome objects and
similar
actions you should know however that
such words resemble the statement of a
man who takes and profits from medicine
and who declaring that its benefit
proceeds just from its unpleasantness
and its bitter taste then takes to
swallowing everything which tastes
unpleasant this is a mistaken attitude
for the benefit lies in a special
property which is present in the
medicine not in its bit of
taste just as the Physicians alone are
aware of this property so too is the
reason for the beneficial nature of
hunger known only to the great
Scholars whoever makes himself hungry
having believed that the revealed text
which praise
hunger uh must need benefit even if he
does not know why it is beneficial in
the manner of the man who takes medicine
and benefits without being told how it
profits
him but despite this we shall explain
this matter for the benefit of those who
wish to R rise from the level of belief
to that of understanding because Allah
has said that he will exalt the exalt
those who believe amongst you and those
who have knowledge to higher
degrees and then we see a particularly
fine and acute
example of the imam's very method
methodological methodical approach I
mentioned earlier that one of the
reasons the esteem the is that it is
brilliantly set out and structured
that's why it sometimes referred to as
the great Encyclopedia of Islam you can
look things up very
quickly and here he says hunger has 10
benefits so he now proceeds to list them
first of these is the purification of
the heart the illumination of the
natural
disposition and the sharpening of one's
Insight this is the kind of experience
that we have when we're
fasting for satiety eating On's fill
engenders stupidity and a blindness in
the
heart and increases the vapors of the
brain to produce a form of
intoxication so that the sources of
thought are oppressed and the Heart
finds it a burdensome thing to think and
to perceive things with any
rapidity a child when it eats too much
becomes unable to memorize things and
its mind is corrupted so that it becomes
slow and dull-witted
and then a quote from abuan darani
again make yourselves hungry for this
abases the soul softens the heart and
yields Heavenly knowledge
and then a saying fromb
abas who we know of course is the cousin
of
the and the great mu of early
Islam
the once said the heart of whom soever
eats his fill and then sleeps will grow
harder then he declared there is a tithe
as zakat for everything and the zakat of
the stomach is
hunger then a quote from IM
sh this is jar
sh great Maliki
Alim a pupil of Imam Al
juned lived in the early 4th Century of
the
Hijra and known often for his ecstatic
utterances and occasional eccentric
Behavior I've never hungered for a
single day without beholding in my heart
an Open Door of wisdom and an ability to
be admonished which I had never seen
before again our nearest experience of
this is Ramadan because that's usually
the only time when we're significantly
hungry if you listen
to the Quran or the Hadith or a
religious discourse while you're hungry
in
Ramadan assuming that you're not so
slothful that you just switch your mind
off but if you're paying attention you
will find that it's more
effective and this is because of the
spirit of Detachment from the world
which the hunger
induces so that's the first
benefit of
hunger then the Imam goes on to outline
the
second second benefit is the softness
and purity of the Heart by which it is
ready to attain the Delight of intimate
discourse with Allah and to be affected
by his remembrance
his how many acts of remembrance there
are which are done with a tongue and
with an attentive heart while the heart
nonetheless fails to find any Delight
therein and is not affected to the
extent that it were as though a veil
existed composed of the heart's
hardness when however it is softened due
to certain circumstances it will be
affected most powerfully by the
remembrance and will take great Delight
in communing with him usually an empty
stomach is the reason for
this one reason for the proven
effectiveness of
prayer and the last moments before iar
in Ramadan is precisely this it's the
best time to
pray one of the times when prayers are
answered because of
this abasement of the
Naps Detachment from the world
Abu darani again cited here as saying
worship is Sweetest for me when my belly
Cleaves to my back so great was his
state of
hunger the third
benefit lies in mortification and
abasement and the removal of exaltation
rejoicing and
exuberance which comprise the beginning
of rebellion and heedlessness of Allah
subhanahu wa tala
it has to be said here that this
is one of the principal reasons for the
state
of trivial exuberance and exaltation
which one finds in the wealthy countries
of the modern Western
world everybody is permanently
full people think it's a catastrophe if
they go for three or four hours without
at least
snacking grazing is the order of the day
refrigerator door breaks so often is it
opened nobody is happy even if they're
at
work or studying unless there is a
bucket sized cup of Coke in front of
them from which they take a sip every
few
seconds so appalling is the idea that we
might for even a micr be deprived of the
gratification of this particularly human
urging I gather
that Cadbury's chocolate recently spent
800,000
developing a new kind of wrapping that
diminishes the time it takes to open the
bar of
chocolate by 2
seconds worth 800,000 to do that in
order to reduce that quite shocking
blasphemous delay between desire and
gratification that's the nature of our
civilization and it would be funny but
for the fact that a third of the world's
population is hungry not as a religious
virtue but because they live in
settlements where they have to walk 2 or
3 hours before they can even get
water where a significant proportion of
children die of
malnutrition and I wonder if they know
what's going on in those jets that fly
high above them taking the bloated
representatives of Western Civilization
as they tuck into their Airline meals to
some Center of Indulgence in the seels
OR Goa or
wherever this is a grave thing in Islam
because the poor were a concern of
theas from the beginning of the Rah one
of the earliest themes along with the
fundamental themes ofed and the negation
of sh
is feeding the
poor but the modern world pays no
attention to that the modern world is
concerned
with
dieting how would one
explain to a starving peasant in
Bangladesh or Chad what it means to
diet what would they think of us if they
knew how many zillion are spent on new
diets in the west or even more
obscenely on medications that enable you
to eat as much as you like without
getting
fat what does it mean in the third world
for the elite to drink diet
Pepsi what on Earth could that signify
to those whose life is a constant worry
about where the next morsel will come
from for their families
this is the great iniquity of the modern
world and it makes a nonsense of all
talk of progress that there should be
this widening Gulf between rich and poor
between fat and
thin the gross national product of
Tanzania substantially Muslim country is
2.8 million pound 2.8 billion pound
which has to be shared between 30
million
people the annual income of Morgan
grenal The Merchant
Bank 22.2 billion which is shared
amongst 160
people such are the extreme absurd
injustices of the modern world and
they're becoming more extreme and more
unjust and more anti- prophetic with
every passing
moment this is the reality of the new
world order the fat become still fatter
and the thin become still more desperate
so this is his third benefit he says
lies in mortification and abasement and
the removal of exaltation rejoicing and
exuberance which compris the beginning
of rebellion and heedlessness of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala
but the soul is mortified and abased by
nothing more effective than hunger which
when it prevails causes it to have
Placid trust in its Lord and fear of him
and to be aware of its helplessness and
abasement when it weakness it when it
weakens and becomes desperate for the
morsel of bread which it misses so that
the whole world appears dark to a man
because one drink of water did not come
when he desired
it for as long as he fails to behold the
baseness and helplessness and dependence
of his own soul he will be unable to
behold the glory and power of His Lord
his saving Felicity therefore lies in
his seeing himself at all times to be
base and helpless and his Lord to be
rich glorious Mighty and Powerful
inallah we'll break now it's time for
the
aan and I hope we'll have an opportunity
to continue with this Exposition after
the
prayer I've been creeping rather slowly
through this text we have just done
three of these 10 benefits of
hunger all of them I think are important
undeniable
the Imam comes to the
fourth and this ties in with what we
were saying about
the trials of the Modern Age he says the
fourth benefit is that one comes never
to forget Allah's trials and torments or
those who are afflicted by
them for the man sated is liable to
forget those people who are hungry and
to forget hunger
itself intelligent bondsman never behold
the tribulation without recalling the
tribulations of the
afterlife when he thirsts he recalls The
Thirst from which people will suffer on
the wide Plains of the day of
arising when he hungers he recalls the
hunger of the people of the fire which
is so extreme that they shall long to
eat even Thorn
fruit and the fruit of zakum and
drink molten
lead never should a bondsman forget the
punish M torments and calamities of the
for these are the things that arouse
fear whoever is not in a state of
humility sickness poverty and
tribulation will forget the AK which
will therefore fail to be manifest in
his soul or prevalent in his
heart it's for this reason that the
bondsman should suffer a trial or
witness the trial of others and the most
appropriate thing with which he should
be tried is
hunger for in addition to the simple
reminding of the torment of the after
life it contains a great number of other
benefits which is one reason why the
prophets and Saints were particularly
Afflicted with trials the best among
them being the most sorely Afflicted of
all to remember those who are hungry and
needy is therefore one of the benefits
of hunger since this condition will
conduce to compassion feeding the hungry
and charity towards God's creatures the
man who is sated by contrast is heedless
of those who
hunger the fifth and greatest benefit
lies in the breaking of all one's
desires for sin and in achieving Mastery
over
the the soul which commands
evil remember this is the lowest of The
Three Degrees of the self of which we
spoke yesterday
for all sins originate in one's desires
and strengths the stuff of which is food
in every case when one eats less every
one of one's desires and strengths will
be
enfeebled the saving Felicity the S of
man consists entirely in the control he
wields over his own soul while damnation
and misery ensue when his soul his nafs
controls
him just as you cannot Master a stubborn
riding Beast without weakening weakening
it through hunger for when it eats its
fill it becomes strong obstinate and
defiant so it is with the
Naps then he gives a quote
from another of the great early Muslims
early
sufis he was
from the s from Upper Egypt although he
traveled extensively dies in the year
245 of our calendar and he is credited
with first
having expounded in a systematic form
the and the of the
path the names of these are there in the
Sunnah but this particular
differentiation was made particularly
clearly by IM For the First Time The
just to remind you are fleeting States
frequently of an emotional affective
nature which come and go rapidly in the
of the
believer whereas
the semi-permanent
stations rungs on the ladder where one
may spend some
time seven of them we mentioned
earlier and so on and this
differentiation between fleeting and
semi-permanent spiritual conditions was
made with particular Clarity by
IM anyway so IM Al gazali is here citing
him as saying never have I eaten my fill
without then committing or wishing to
commit some
sin the sixth benefit consists in the
repulsion of
sleep could be useful for jet lag
perhaps I have to try it and acquiring
the ability to remain awake for long
periods a man who eats his f will drink
abundantly and whoever drinks abundantly
will sleep abundant abundantly
also for this reason one of the shs used
to say whenever food was
served assembled mids do not eat much
lest you drink much which will cause you
to sleep much and therefore to lose
much sleeping abundantly is a waste of
once's
Lifetime and causes one to miss the
tahajud prayer and results in a dull
disposition
and a Hardness of
Heart one's lifetime is the most
precious of treasures and constitutes a
bondsman's Capital with which he trades
sleep on the other hand is a kind of
death remember the
Hadith sleep is the brother of death for
when indulged into excess it shortens
one's lease on
life in addition the manifestly great
Merit which attaches to theed prayer
will pass one by if one sleeps abund ly
and to the extent that one is overcome
by drowsiness during worship one will
not taste the sweetness of
worship the seventh benefit is that
lengthy acts of worship are made
easier food prevents a man from
worshiping much since he needs a time in
which he busies himself with eating and
may require time for buying and cooking
food as well he needs time to wash his
hands and to pick his teeth and will
make many visits to the privy because of
having drunk so much where he to spend
the hours he used up in these activities
in the remembrance of Allah intimate
communing with him and the other
varieties of worship he would profit
greatly among the things which are made
Impossible by much eating are retaining
the condition of tahara and spending
much time in the mosque for someone who
eats abundantly is obliged to leave the
mosque when he breaks his state of
Purity and in order to pass
water among them likewise is fasting
which is easier for a man who is
accustomed to
hunger if you're used to being hunger
hungry then fasting something you can do
more
often fasting together with spending
much time in the mosque and remaining in
the state of tahara and turning one's
meal times into Times of worship yield a
great profet which can only be despised
by those who are heedless and do not
know the value of religion and who in
instead are content with the life of
this world and feel secure
therein and who know only the appearance
of the life of this
world and a heedless of
the darani again has pointed out six
disadvantages of eating one's fill by
saying
whosoever eats his fil is attended by
six defects he loses the sweetness of
communing with Allah he is unable to
memorize Divine wisdom he has denied
compassion for others since when he is
full he imagines that everyone else is
full likewise he finds worship to be
burdensome his desires become stronger
and while other believers are at the
mosques those who have eaten their fill
are at the rubbish heaps and the
latrines emptying their stomachs
benefit number eight this is the bodily
Health which results from eating
little for many diseases are caused by
overeating and by the presence of a
residue of humors in the stomach and the
arteries illness prevents one from
worshiping it distracts the heart and
stands in the way of remembrance and
reflection it spoils one's life and
obliges one to submit to blood leing
bloodletting and
cupping and to drinking medicines and
seeing phys I all of which requires
money which in turn can only be obtained
through things which require that one
exhausts oneself in avoiding various
kinds of sins and desires hunger makes
all of this
unnecessary in a Hadith it is
said fast and you will be healthy this
is a Hadith narrated in many sources
including IM
fasting hunger and eating less conduce
therefore to the health of the
body so that it becomes free of
disorders and of the heart which becomes
free of the diseases of rebellion and
exaltation as well as a number of other
complaints and fasting of course and
reducing one's intake of food on a
regular basis are methods well known to
the uh Natural Health industry one of
the most frequent prescriptions
of uh traditional natural paaths is one
should simply eat
less ninth benefit lies in reduced
expenditure other practical Advantage
whoever becomes used to eating little
will find a modest income
sufficient whereas a man who is
habituated to eating his fill will find
that his belly becomes a creditor
impossible to shake off who seizes him
by the throat every day saying what will
you eat today
therefore will he be compelled to enter
into all sorts of activities that either
earned from unlawful Pursuits so that he
sins or from lawful ones which will
involve him in humiliation and
exhaustion he may even need to direct
his Wishful gaze towards other people in
other words who may
be uh forced to beg which is the utmost
form of abasement and
degradation a Believers needs a few a
sage once remarked that I satisfy most
of my needs by renouncing them which is
moreover more restful for my
heart someone else said whenever I feel
a wish to borrow money from someone for
the sake of satisfying a desire or
making an investment I borrow from
myself whereupon I renounce the desire
thus I am my own best
creditor and then an auor from ibraim
bin Adam who is really one of the
earliest of the sufis some rank him
amongst
the dies in the midc
Century ibraim B
Adam known as a pupil of IM Abu hanifah
interested in F A number of stories are
told about his TBA and how he took the
path of Sufism perhaps the best known is
that he had been a Prince of the City of
Bal which is inasan present day
Afghanistan who worshiped amid the
Splendor of his Palace worshiped quite
assiduously
and then one night he couldn't get to
sleep because of a sound a bumping noise
on the roof of the
palace so he goes upstairs and he looks
around on the roof of the palace and
there's this
man casting around and looking for
something and the prince ibraim bin Adam
says what on Earth are you doing and he
says I'm looking for my
camel and the prince said that's the
most ridiculous thing I've heard in my
life life looking for a camel on the
roof of a
palace and the man
says not as ridiculous as looking for
Allah in a
palace and the prince repents exchanges
clothes with the strange man and
vanishes and takes to the path of
wandering through the Earth in search of
teachers and wisdom and and repentance
one of the categories of a listed by IM
alhad again in his great
until he becomes a pupil of IM Abu
hanifah and becomes one of the great
exponents of
tasa so here he says he used to ask his
well he used to ask his companions about
the price of food when told that it was
high he would say lower it with
renunciation other words don't eat so
much and the price of food automatically
comes
down
again said the Glutton is base in three
circumstances if he spends his time in
worship he will grow lazy if he has a
trade he will not be safe from the evils
of his trade and if he has a private
income he will not give Allah his
due benefit number 10
finally the 10th benefit is that the
aspirant is enabled to put others before
himself and to give in charity to the
orphans and the poor that which is
Surplus to his wants
on the he will be shaded by his charity
as is stated in the Hadith famous
in that says that the is shaded by his
on sound Hadith that which he eats is
stored up in the
labatory while that which he gives in
charity goes to the storehouse which is
Allah's Grace therefore man benefits
from his wealth only in so far as he
gives it
away when he will have rendered it
permanent
Everlasting just as when he eats it he
destroys it and when he wears it he
wears it
out to give away what food one does not
need is far better therefore than
indigestion and eating one's
full used whenever he recited the word
of
Allah this verse of the am that that we
had previously we offered the trust unto
the heavens and the earth and the
mountains but they shrank from bearing
it and were fearful of it and it was
assumed by man assuredly he has proved a
tyrant and a fool alassan used to say by
way of
interpretation Allah offered it to the
seven tiered Heavens which are the paths
which he did ornament with stars and the
bearers of the great throne and he said
to them will you bear this trust on all
that ensues from it what ensues from it
they asked he replied that if you do
good you will be rewarded and if you do
evil you shall be punished no they
answered then he offered it to the Earth
in the same wise and it refused also and
he offered it to the firm sheer and
lofty Mountains will you bear this trust
and all that ensues from
it what ensues from it they asked and he
mentioned the reward and the punishment
once again and they
refused then he offered it to man who
accept Ed
it truly he has proved a tyrant and a
fool a
tyrant against himself and a fool
concerning the Commandments of his
Lord then IM Hassan says by Allah I have
seen people selling the trust for the
sake of their wealth acquiring many
thousands thereby yet to what use did
they put them they extended their houses
and thereby narrowed their graves they
they fattened their horses and thereby
starved their religion they followed the
whims of their nafs by appearing morning
and eve before the gates of the ruler
exposing themselves thereby to sore
Temptations although Allah had granted
them Comfort
enough one of them says seek such and
such a thing for me and bring me such
and such a thing reclining on his left
side while he consumes the money of
other men his speech his mockery and
derision his money was gained unlawfully
until when his belly swells up and IND
digestion afflicts him he says lad get
me something which will help me digest
my
food you scoundrel is it your food that
you wish to digest you are digesting
your religion instead where is the POA
where is the Widow where is the
destitute where the orphan it is they
whom Allah has commanded you to
assist and IM gazali says this is a
reference to the tenth benefit of hunger
which entails the donation of one
Superfluous food to the poor so that one
may store up something better than one
would gain by eating it and thereby
thereby avoid being burdened with
another's sin and we know in the that
the would not sleep at night until any
food or money that remained in his house
had been given to the
poor and then he concludes
this impressive chapter by saying such
are the 10 benefits of hunger under each
one has subsumed countless subdivisions
of incalculable
advantage for Hunger is a great
Storehouse of the benefits which help
one in the as one of the salaf declared
hunger is the key to the and the gateway
to renunciation while eating one's fill
is the key to the world and the gateway
to
Greed this is very evident from the
Hadith which we have cited which we may
understand with Insight by studying the
the details of each benefit so that you
rise above the level of mere
Faith however if you do not come to
learn these reasons but simply believe
in the Merit of hunger you shall be at
the level of those who receive their
faith through
imitation I think unless the organizers
decree otherwise I will use the last few
minutes in uh addressing some of the
questions that I didn't have a chance to
do justice
two in
uh this morning's
session is relates to the
the one of the advantages of this uh
system of having everything on scraps of
paper is that one can through a discret
slate of hand suppress the questions
that are simply too difficult you don't
have to say all the
time as IM Malik
did all right let's start with the
difficult one can you please explain the
station of
F Well no I can't because this is
a which cannot be expect expressed in
words at the highest levels of the
path the people of sof make it clear
that human language really is inadequate
and these are just indications that make
sense only to those who have tasted
these
things gazali frequently uses the word
or
taste and it's a common place of
Sufism that you
cannot understand the terminology unless
you know what it is
indicating just as you cannot explain
the beauty of the Moon
to a man who has never opened his eyes
or The Taste of Honey to somebody who
has never tasted honey so too the
Delight of proximity to Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala cannot be described to those
who have not known it because it is
something that is categorically
new F usually translated as
Annihilation and what it means is the
grinding away through processes of I and
thck and self purification
of the coarseness coarseness of the
heart the heart's metaphor is the the
mirror and upon the mirror there is the
the
rust the Quran speaks of rust that is
over people's hearts because of what
they used to acquire their sinfulness
their attitudes their
distraction the function of Sufism
throughout is to polish away this rust
when the rust is
removed the mirror is there and the
mirror is by its nature invisible when
it's
pure and so too is the state of the
annihilated servant of Allah subhah wa
tala when he is in this
m and in that mirror the mirror of his
heart because of where he is facing only
the glory of alhak
blazes that's what's meant by the
station of of
annihilation it's not a Fusion of two
Essences it's not or these heretical
principles that IM condemns so roundly
because it is not the union of the
nature of the ab with the nature of the
that would be an
impossibility it's not a union at all we
don't use that term it's not an
Incarnation the subject object
distinction is completely erased because
the human subject no longer exists at
that stage
a more down to earth question isn't
taking ba a political allegiance for aif
why is it necessary in
a well we know
that the sahaba obeyed
the not just in some areas of their life
the political area but in every area of
their life when he gave them spiritual
instruction recommended certain
practices
particularly to
the they were required to
obey so it is also when one has a
spiritual director that one accepts his
instructions or else you get into
trouble as it is with the acquisition of
any
science if you're being taught medicine
you accept the instruction given to you
by your professor and if you don't and
you try and work things out as a student
by yourself you're likely to make a
terrible hash of things there's no law
preventing you from doing that possibly
nonetheless it's not recommended and in
the science of the the hearts it's even
more
important that one has a relationship of
fty of uh due obedience to the one who
has Traverse the landscape takes you by
the hand and takes you through a Terrain
that he knows and that is unknown to you
so ba yes one makes ba of Theif but
there are other forms of b as well that
are no less well established in our
Traditions can you briefly explain the
concept of tasa and how it plays a role
in disciplining the
soul well the purpose
of
the really is disciplining the soul
that's what what the S wolf is it
doesn't play a role in disciplining the
soul it it is the disciplining of the
Soul anything that produces or more more
refined compassionate wise luminous
Muslim is considered to be tasa that's
the term that the traditionally use the
rubric under which they lump anything
and everything that conduces to the
purification of the
Soul see what we have here
H earlier today you mentioned that it is
okay to read poetry that is secular in
order to learn about the culture we live
in today will the same apply to the
music of today's age not music that is
morally against the teachings of Islam
well the message of music is primarily
affective rather than in the the
lyrics uh I would regard it as
legitimate to know about the musical
culture of the West
in so far as one has to understand the
processes of communication in the world
in which we live and also the influences
which are coming to bear on the new
generation of Muslims the Islamic world
as well as here and also the influences
which are coming to bear on our children
whether we like it or not majority of
young Muslims in this country listen to
music we have to know exactly what kind
of music are likely to be poisonous and
which are less damaging so yes we do
need to know this
very elegant script
here
H this is an American
question can you please address the
question of fatness in
women remembering uh Saida
slda yeah one of the earliest of the
prophet's marriages was to to slda and
she is remembered for having been a
stout woman well there is a stoutness
that is um comes from the Constitution
some women eat very or men eat very
little but they're nonetheless
big and
uh Physicians are well aware of that
sometimes the basis for it is uh
glandular or
hormonal sometimes the basis for it is
that they just have a very large
physical frame or they're very muscular
I knew a Sheikh in
Turkey who was fairly enormous but I
also knew the man who did the Tad
massaging of him and he said the shikh
was all muscle doesn't know where it
came from but there was no fat on him it
was all muscle he was like a rhinoceros
is the man described
him so fatness itself is not wrong but
uh gluttony that leads to fatness
certainly is
I've been taught when
covering that the fall should not be
seen as shameful because it all was the
will of Allah and the text discussed a
tablet that certain servants know about
such as
prophets and it was written there that
Adam would eat from the tree and he knew
that so he was actually obeying the
Commandment of his Lord s somewhat
confused um I don't see why this is
confusing uh obviously
the S Adam was not committing a sin in
the sense that we would Define
it sometimes it's referred to even in
theith as
or and in the great Hadith of
the which has
humanity and Milling panicking crowds
going from one Prophet to the next
asking for that prophet's sh first of
all they go to S Adam and they ask for
his intercession and he
says I committed a sin which was eating
from the tree and I am preoccupied with
that and have not time for others and
then they go to S
ibraim uh who uh told untruths three
times when he said for
instance when he pointed to the large
Idol that he claimed to destroy the
smaller idols and this is a lie which is
apparently a wrong action and so on with
the other Ania and they come to S
Muhammad sahai wasam and he has
the because he did not know any of these
things but the in commenting on this
Hadith which is a sound Hadith say that
these were not actually
sins these were only apparent slips they
do not affect the the isma of the
prophets and they do not affect their
qualification for conveying the messages
of Allah
and S
Adam did this and did this Quran refers
to them both falling
together it uses the duel doesn't
suggest that the responsibility was
primarily that of either of
them this is before they assumed the
mantle of the in other words there was
really no T at that time the am as we
know it had not yet Fallen upon them
they were in a prelapsarian state of
Innocence they were like children they
were not yet b in a sense and hence this
cannot be considered to be a sin and it
may well be the case as this text
appears to imply
that uh this is all in Allah's knowledge
it was
pre predetermined and that Satan Adam
had knowledge of this and hence it
doesn't constitute a sin that might well
be a legitimate way of understanding it
subh impossible really for our minds to
imagine what life before the fall might
have been
like I think should I
stop okay I shall uh
carefully retain those slips of paper
that I have not had the opportunity of
opening yet and inshallah there will be
an opportunity to look at them
tomorrow for